Hey a minority of people watching this
channel will be aware that I have a
background for more than 10 years as a
scholar of Buddhism if you put my name
into Google still many of the search
results relate to that personal history
I've had because people are still
searching for that stuff people are
still downloading links and articles
that are on the internet from that time
in my life and one of the questions I've
been asked most broadly overall is what
is the future of Buddhism normally
people are asking it in a kind of broad
hypothetical global sense and they're
not asking in a hands-on human scale
sense of what can you do what can I do
what can we do for the future of
Buddhism now I should add here the
disclaimer I myself am NOT a Buddhist I
openly identify as an ex bonused and as
a nihilist I identify with the
philosophy of historical nihilism for
what that's worth and I could do a
separate video talking about exactly
what that's worth however I understand
that a small number of people are still
really interested in what I have to say
under this heading because of the depth
and the breadth of my experience I was
asked in a conversation just today about
what Judaism meant to me and what kind
of participation in the Jewish community
I had in my adult life and I had to say
none at all I've been living in places
like China and Cambodia Laos been living
in Southeast Asia and even here in
Canada my adult life is that almost
nothing to do with Judaism and it's had
a lot to do with with Buddhism in its
institutional historical reality as well
as on the side of scholarship research
and what-have-you I've also had
discussions lately with professors here
sorry I am gonna answer this question
about the future of Buddhism but this
video is also partly about me it's not
just about Buddhism it's about me and
what I have to say of a Buddhism
naturally or inevitably I guess while I
am an ex Buddhist you know one of my
professors here is a special
in the South Pacific so small island
societies like Tonga Fiji Samoa and in
talking about both the indigenous
religions there and in the total
obliteration of the native culture by
Christianity on those islands I'm
reminded of the comparison to Buddhism
and I can you know in a very real sense
there's always a question of better and
worse with these things although I do
not believe in any of the supernatural
elements of Buddhism and I never did I
never believed in supernatural Buddhism
nevertheless in looking at these islands
that are in Asia
these small almond societies but have
really been cut off from Buddhism
historically and now are you know
captured by basically British
Christianity of course you can't help
but feel that they would be better off
if they had been part of the Buddhist
world rather than being isolated from it
and then colonized by Europeans in this
way and even within Southeast Asia
you know we had in front of my eyes
ongoing at that time the historical
experience of indigenous animist peoples
people who had never been Buddhists to
practice traditional spirit worshipping
religions converting to Buddhism for the
first time and in other cases tribal
peoples were converting to Christianity
now of course many anthropologists would
be upset to hear any discussion of these
things at all and feel that you know the
native culture is being destroyed or
disappearing when people are making the
choice as rational adults to convert to
Buddhism however living there seeing the
reality face to face and dealing with
the extreme brutality just of animal
sacrifice again one can't help feeling
sympathetically that these people would
indeed be better off involved with
Buddhism even if you regard all this
for naturalness is I remember
learning in depth about one particular
tribal group and their their chieftain
their tribal leader decided he was fed
up with their indigenous tradition that
they should convert a terabyte of
Buddhism partly because he said look you
know this animal sacrifice it's madness
and it's keeping us all locked in
poverty his particular group their
religious and social life centered
around sacrificing water buffalo and
cows so they were always bankrupting
themselves these are poor people in a
third world country buying and killing
these animals for magical reasons and of
course raising them and so on there are
other groups they're indigenous to that
same area whose whole religious life
centers around sacrificing chickens
ritual slaughter of chickens including
torturing the chickens to death and some
pretty gruesome ways cutting the heads
off chickens and I don't want to get
into the details in that religious
context where on the one hand you have
sort of the brutality of animism and on
the other hand you have the encroachment
from Christian missionaries all around
it's very easy to be pro Buddhist not
even the in the historical past in the
historical present talking about a
current ongoing process of cultural
transformation even with the
considerable caveat that I regard the
supernatural claims of Buddhism as
completely false so you can see why I've
inserted this series of caveats as a
introduction to this topic now in the
21st century looking ahead to the 22nd
century
what legitimate legitimacy can Buddhism
have I'll repeat that
what legitimacy can put ISM have now in
the future
I think there are two broad categories
under which I'd speak positively with
the future Buddhism and then some notes
negatively positively speaking we have
to be looking at on the one hand
scholarship and in the other hand
community service I don't know what I
mean I've had so many experiences with
these kind of very cynical Westerners
who think they're idealistic but who
really believe in a highly manipulated
an insincere form of Buddhism
criticizing me
and these people white Western Buddhists
tend to assume that my engagement with
the religion was purely rational purely
archaeological and in the contrary as a
character I have always really
appreciated that you know for example
people need funeral rituals I think you
know funeral rituals are quite
meaningful again with no supernatural
beliefs whatsoever I don't think
anything magical happens at your funeral
but as a social event to bring people
together to mourn the dead and perform
some kind of ritual for the dead I think
that is meaningful this type of social
function of Buddhism really is important
and significant and it's worth looking
at critically what is the status of it
now in the 21st century problematic at
best no matter where you are in the
world now beyond that if you've watched
this channel at all you'll know that I
also have an engagement with charity
work talking about social services are
you talking about
feeding the poor giving up sacks of rice
to starving people are you talking about
caring for orphans are you talking about
interventions and disaster areas in
these areas I mean Buddhism is the
weakest religion in the world if you
want a career in disaster relief
services humane
during work of any kind you're almost
compelled to be Christian the whole
field is completely dominated by
Christianity and it's not a simple
matter of economics anytime there's an
earthquake or there's a disaster there
are basically one or two very small very
vocal Buddhist charities based in Taiwan
that try to show up and symbolically
represent Buddhism but it's drop in the
bucket and within China China is a
communist country and also within
Thailand Thailand is a Buddhist majority
country where Buddhism is the official
state religion the official religion of
the monarchy and so on
but within both China and Thailand these
types of humanitarian services a
completely dominated by Christian
missionaries it's not easy for Christian
missionaries to operate in either of
these countries there were you know
restrictions on them and they've been
tremendously successful exactly where
Buddhism has been a failure so there's a
question of can you build a constituency
for Buddhism can Buddhism have a future
rooted in on the one hand scholarly
legitimacy in the other hand social
services legitimacy and can you have a
dynamic connection between the two of
those now again in terms of scholarly
legitimacy some people take a very
unsure double set of assumptions that
I'm interested in an incredibly obtuse
and irrelevant details of textual
scholarship that will never influence
the lives of ordinary Buddhists and
nothing could be further from the truth
when I talk about how scholarship
matters in terms of a religion as this
today firstly you have to understand
Buddhism today is so corrupt and has
been led by people who are sincerely
ignorant of the textual and
philosophical basis what is enforced so
long that actually I have a book here
I'd like to grab it's just out of sight
um
I have an autobiography of a Buddhist
monk on my desk here somewhere that I
was gonna hold up as an example the
Buddhist monk in that book his whole
life was defined by being a refugee
world war two in the Communist
revolution in China
completely shaped his life and he spent
his life running away from that and you
can really understand why he was
basically in a struggle the cart try to
sort of preserve the ignorance of his
own grandparents in terms of traditional
village Buddhism in China and he never
developed the type of scholarly
awareness of the history of Buddhism or
Buddhist philosophy or Buddhist text
that even I did let alone some greater
expert so it is not without sympathy for
people that I talk about ignorance but
on the other hand a lot of what you're
looking in Buddhism including that monk
whose biography I have right here
somewhere
a lot of the ignorance is at the level
of a Christian telling you that their
faith is based on a dialogue between
Santa Claus and Jesus or between Santa
Claus and Moses and you have to say wait
a minute I've read the Bible
those two people never met like Santa
Claus isn't in the Bible at all what are
you talking about it's no joke I mean
the blind leading the blind has gone a
long long way in in Buddhism in the past
100 years but in the past thousand years
also and the natural check on that
tendency can only be legitimate
scholarship now legitimate scholarship
also turns up things of real
philosophical interest and of real
literary value the legitimacy of
Buddhism cannot rest on false
supernatural promises that are
equivalent to prayer and other religions
it can rest on people really seeing
value in philosophical literature and
cultural heritage that contains
outlandish and mythological elements but
also has elements that are at least
rewarding to read and engage with in the
same way that Shakespeare
you know the value of Shakespeare's
Hamlet does not rest on its historical
accuracy if somebody discovers new
evidence about what really happened to a
certain prince in an obscure prince in
the history of Europe nobody would say
well Shakespeare's Hamlet is worthless
because it's been proven to be
historically false or inaccurate same is
true even Shakespeare's plays about
historical Kings within England or two
gentlemen of verona or something none of
this stuff is valuable
culturally morally ethically even you
know people feel they're being uplifted
by edgy by educating themselves in
shakespeare they want to educate their
children in Shakespeare so that there'll
be good people in some sense I mean
there is an ethical component to why we
study and teach literature especially
with what's considered high or refined
literature in this way there's nothing
to really do with truth claims and
definitely something to do with with
supernatural claims of efficacy but
again today the reality is Buddhism has
really bottomed out in both of these
things believe me very few people alive
have visited as many Buddhist
universities that I as I have and have
spoken to as many experts to figure out
if there was anywhere in any Buddhist
monastery or any university anywhere in
the world that you could legitimately
make progress in the scholarship of
Buddhist texts and the short answer is
for me for my generation no there's
really nowhere and if you're thinking
about telling me about some exception
let me tell you I've probably looked
into it I've probably talked to some
people off the record and found out that
that exception to the rule is not
accepted the rule it's a tremendously
dark time right now on 21st century for
but I think it'll never recover
mmm being honest with you in that sense
if you want to talk to me about the
future of Buddhism I can give an answer
that's not snarky at all and say there
is no future because I neither believe
that within my lifetime Buddhism will
recover legitimacy in terms of social
services nor in terms of scholarship
those the positive side of this video
the
negative side is in terms of the core
tenets of Buddhism many of the
supernatural elements people can lose
faith in without discarding the religion
many Buddhists talk about the fact that
you don't need to believe in
reincarnation to be a Buddhist this is
true however the truth claims
surrounding meditation and surrounding
nirvana strictly defined that is a
challenge to most people's faith and to
how they think about the future of the
religion I think I mean I can remember
reading and again I'm really a fan of
you know authentic village Buddhism I'm
not a fan of just hanging out in the
library or the archives my approach to
Buddhism was not strictly archaeological
I remember reading about a traditional
Buddhist preacher in the small villages
of Myanmar aka Burma went from town to
town and Myanmar preaching more or less
the same thing for decades of his life
and you know one of his great choruses
one of the things he returned to the
matically he would always emphasize to
people they should not be trying to go
to heaven after they die they should not
be trying to just get a good
reincarnation and they should not be
worshipping gods they should instead be
focused on achieving Nirvana and on
doing good deeds and being good people
in order to achieve Nirvana in this
lifetime which is quite a rousing an
uplifting approach to take actually if
you know about Buddhism the vast
majority of Buddhist monks do not have
the nerve to suggest that you think
especially not to sort of common
peasants in a small village instead that
indeed conservatives don't worry too
much about nirvana let's not talk about
Nirvana because it's pretty
philosophically difficult this guy was
saying no philosophy is for everybody
Nirvana sir
well both as a weakness as and a
strength as a challenge to Buddhism now
I think you have to look at a sort of
progress that will come from
acknowledging that Nirvana is just a
philosophical concept and like many
philosophical concepts in the Pali canon
in the Tarot that uh written works that
preserve the philosophy of Buddhism um
it is interesting and it is even more
interesting when you examine it in its
real culture the cultural context it
originated from in ancient India it's
still interesting today
unlike Christian philosophy if God who
wants to read st. Augustine a vast
majority of Christian philosophy it's
very difficult to get men interested in
the Buddhist philosophy is interesting
so again that's a strength not a
weakness but you have to really just
admit that Nirvana is only a
philosophical concept that both the
modern assumptions about meditation and
the ancient assumption of meditation are
supernatural mythology and in a simple
sense they are false I still do not see
that as a reason for Buddhism to cease
to exist as a religion though if you
look at the founding of reformed Judaism
reformed Judaism started off with a
charter or Constitution it refers to the
God idea and it's actually pretty
obvious if you read that Charter the
Constitution that the people
founding this new new form of Judaism
Reform Judaism they did not in a
conventional sense believe in God or at
any rate they wanted to create a version
of Judaism that was open to an accepting
of atheists to be frank I do not think
that Judaism holds up as a religion if
you switch from God to the God idea I
think it falls apart if we're being
honest you can read the whole Bible and
you tell me if God doesn't exist how
much real value is there in this
religious tradition
um but I actually do not think Buddhism
is in a similar corner I think that you
can replace Nirvana with the Nirvana
idea you can look at that stuff as
philosophy and like ancient Greek
philosophy it's a philosophy that
reflects the cultural context that
originated in it reflects the other
religions it was competing with at that
time in India especially Hinduism and
Jainism but other religions that have
completely disappeared ancient religions
of India that don't exist anymore and it
can be meaningful in its own way but yes
at some point the snake oil salesman
side of Buddhism would have to stop for
the religion to have a future of any
kind you'd have to stop selling people
the illusion that they can be happier
healthier earn more money if they just
close their eyes and perform a breathing
exercise that is based on a horrendous
mistranslation of a completely
irrelevant ancient text and you have to
stop pretending that a form of monastic
discipline that was absolutely meant for
people living in celibacy and living as
beggars living with a literal begging
bowl that that discipline can somehow be
part of your sexy urban jet-setting 21st
century life as a bourgeois executive or
Buddhism was not designed to be among
the accoutrement of a hedonistic
indulgent lifestyle now the philosophy
of Aristotle was I mean there are other
ancient philosophies that actually fit
him pretty well with a lifestyle of even
aristocratic self-indulgence let alone
bourgeois self-indulgence
but again it's significant that Buddhism
as a philosophy as a religion as a code
in addition still has a lot to offer
even with all these caveats even with
all these aspects taken away and I can't
say that about Aristotle I've read a ton
of Aristotle in all honesty the
potential is not there for Aristotle
have a positive contribution in 21st
century I don't feel that way about
Judaism nor Christianity nor Islam I
really do not think those religions have
something positive to offer in the 21st
century and they have a lot negative to
offer and again if you have a friend
someone you care about personally who
was actually practicing animal sacrifice
in a form of animism you would be so
happy for them if they got interested in
shall we say the civilizing effects of
Buddhism as a religion and if I had a
France and when I cared about personally
who was practicing Islam practicing
Protestant Christianity and they told me
you know I'm gonna give it up because
I'm really into this philosophy called
Buddhism that teaches there is no soul
to live is to suffer and everything is
impermanent pretty strong pretty strong
start to a popular philosophy in the
21st century if I had a friend who can't
even told me that said Wow
I'm so happy for you even though as I
said I personally I don't believe in
reincarnation and I don't believe in any
of the promises that get made by
meditation salesmen